My project is titled, "If it rains, Will it grow? A three-year study in presoaking cottonseed before planting". This year’s pro
ject
builds on the results from last year. In 2000 I learned that by presoaking cottonseed I could decrease germination time and
increase cotton yield. The process of presoaking the cottonseed washes off a portion of the cottonseed treatment. This treatmen
t is
fungicides that are added to the seed to protect the seed from seedling diseases in wet weather. Numerous cotton growers
questioned my results should the weather turn wet at germination time. Therefore:
The objective is to determine if in a wet environment presoaking cottonseed will result in higher end of year
cotton yield.
Obtain one cotton growers cooperation in supplying field, cottonseed, planter and in season
cultural practices in growing the cotton. Three five gallon buckets, water, marking flags, meter stick, marking pen, watering p
ail,
measuring cup, scale and bags for collecting cotton. I soaked the cottonseed needed for 1/2 mile long planting in enough water
to
cover the seed for the designated time. Cottonseed was then drained and dried before planting. I marked six
random replications in the field. At seven days and nine days after planting I sprinkled one inch of water across all treatment
s.
Plant counts were taken at 5 days, 7 days, 9 days, 12 days and 15 days. Final cotton lint was picked, weighed and recorded.
"Raining" on the cotton did in fact induce disease and decrease plant populations. Cotton lint weight was in fact
higher in the I 0 & 15 minute soaked treatments. Statistical analysis showed an 85% confidence level for the trial.
DISCUSSION:
The results was as expected. By "raining" on the cotton I was able to induce seedling diseases and lower the
plant populations. However end of season yields showed more cotton lint at time of harvest with a slightly lower plant
population. The results show that by presoaking cottonseed and washing off some of the seed treatment, even in a wet year, the
end of season yields will be higher than the grower practice now.