My project last year showed that Vitamins A, C and E individually helped Planaria regenerate. Now I am testing
whether combinations of these Vitamins would help Planaria regenerate quicker and if changes in light exposure might effect
regeneration. I think Planaria grown in combination of Vitamins A,C & E in the dark will live the longest and be the longest in
length because Planaria lives mostly in dark environments.
This is the procedure followed: 1. Defined four groups of Vitamin solutions: A & C; A & E; C
& E and A, C & E. 2. Combinations were exposed to either 24-hour light, 24 hour dark or 12 hours of light and 12 hours of da
rk.
The Planaria were cut into head and tail pieces. Using a log sheet to measure the head and tail pieces, measurements and wate
r
changes were performed and logged weekly.
Planaria exposed to Light 24 hours a day showed combination of Vitamin A & C tail grew larger than the Control.
The Planaria exposed to Dark 24 hours a day showed combination of Vitamin A & E head and tail grew larger than the Control.
The Light/Dark combination of Vitamins A & E had head growth about the same as the Control and the tail grew larger than the
Control. Only Control and Vitamin A & E survived the whole experiment. All Planaria that lived in combinations containing
Vitamin C died before the end of the experiment. There were no obvious advantages to growth in any of the Light controlled
environments.
In my previous experiment, individual Vitamins showed a growth advantage. In this experiment, Vitamin A & E
showed a growth advantage ove the control. This means that Vitamin combinations provided important nutrients promoting
Planaria growth regeneration. All other vitamin combinations did not show growth advantage or regeneration. These
combinations all contained Vitamin C and all of the Planaria in this combintaion died. The Vitamin C brand could have been tox
ic
to the Planaria because previously Vitamin C did not kill the Planaria. The surviving Planaria of Vitamin A & E and Control ha
d
similar growth in Light, Dark and Light/Dark exposure. This concludes that Planaria can live in any exposure to light or dark.