My objective was to test my hypothesis that the regular polyhedral dice I was testing (a tetrahedron, an octahedron, a
dodecahedron, an icosahedron, and a rhombic triacontahedron) would be fair dice and that a non-isohedral pentahedral solid,
which I predicted would be more likely to land on its larger faces more frequently than its smaller ones, would not be fair. I
determined if each die were fair by conducting a set number of throws (50 times the number of sides of the die) under the same
conditions, which I recorded on separate tally sheets, using different colors for each set of ten times the number of sides of
the
die. I was then able to determine what values were reached for each increment and enter those data into a spreadsheet that I ha
d
set up to calculate the chi-square values. Next, I calculated the confidence percentages and confidence intervals for each set
of
rolls. I believed that if the chi-square values reached a confidence level of 95% for a given die, it could be considered fair.
The
results of my experiment showed that the tetrahedron, the octahedron, and the dodecahedron are fair dice with confidence
percentages of 96%, 97%, and 99.3%, respectively. The confidence percentage for the icosahedron only reached 92.4%, and
dropped to 11.8% for the final set of rolls. Values for five of the twenty sides were outside the confidence interval for all s
ets of
rolls. The confidence percentage for the triacontahedron was 4.7%. Two opposing sides of this die were rolled a greater number
of times than the other faces and two other opposing faces were rolled a smaller number of times than the other faces. For the
non-isohedral pentahedron, the three larger faces of the five were rolled a greater number of times than the smaller faces. The
confidence percentage for the non-isohedral pentahedron was 0%. I concluded that the regular tetrahedron, octahedron, and
dodecahedron are fair dice. Although research shows that these, as well as the regular icosahedron and the rhombic
triacontahedron are fair dice (based on Euler’s Equation), the particular dice I tested are not fair, possibly due to manufactu
ring
flaws. The non-isohedral pentahedron is not a fair die because the faces are not identical. Because the faces have different sh
apes
and surface areas, the solid landed on the large rectangular faces more frequently than the small triangular ones.