The objective is to determine how temperature affects the speed of clear serum formation in bovine blood. If I
can show the fastest rate of clear serum formation under different temperature scenarios, that information would be very
helpful and profitable to dairy producers.
In three trials on separate days, 110ml of blood was drawn from the same heifer, divided into 3 sets of 7 test
tubes numbered 1-7 with 5ml blood in each tube. One set was placed in a different temperature area simulating a time of
year in the San Joaquin Valley: refrigerator 39 degrees F (winter), room temperature 72 degrees F (spring and fall), and
halogen (heat) lamp 98 degrees F (summer). A rubric was developed to accurately and consistently measure development
of clear serum, and test tubes were evaluated at set times. (#1 from each set at 10 minutes, #2 at 25 minutes, etc.)
Room temperature was consistently the fastest way to get clear serum and refrigerator temperature was
consistently the slowest way to get clear serum. At 4 hrs. 10 min. the average rubric score for room temperature was
4.667, for the halogen (heat) lamp was 3.833, and for the refrigerator was 2.600.
I found my hypothesis to be correct; that if whole blood is left at room temperature then clear
serum will form the fastest. I am familiar with and have used a commercially available bovine pregnancy test on my 4-H
project heifer. This test can be done at 6 days after breeding, significantly sooner than other traditional pregnancy tests.
The test requires clear serum, and most dairies do not have a centrifuge to separate serum. In addition, the directions for
deriving serum included with the test are not accurate in time needed and no mention of temperature is made. A dairy
producer spends $1.25 per day to raise a dairy heifer. To be profitable he wants to get the heifer bred as soon as
physiologically possible. The information from my experiment is helpful to dairy producers because they are better able to
use the serum pregnancy test and decrease cost of raising heifers.