Our experiment was designed to examine the effect of variable Iron (III) concentration on the algae Chlamydomonas
Reinhardii.
we expect the photosynthetic rate (represented as a measure of oxygen evolution and chlorophyll yield) of the algal
sample to rise with a rise in Iron (III) concentration. The rate is expected to rise until the algal solution is over-concentra
ted with
Iron (III), at which point it becomes toxic because of an acute demand for macronutrients (making them biolimiting ) and the
photosynthetic rate drops abruptly.
The Algae was grown in a controlled environment with florescent light, allowing for both red and blue wavelengths of
light until it reached maximum yield. The sample was then divided into three # one part with no iron added, one with .5-ppm iro
n
added and the last with 500-ppm iron added. The two factors measure were a) Oxygen evolution # measured using a Clarke type
oxygen electrode) Chlorophyll yield # measured using a spectrophotometer
In keeping with our hypothesis, it was observed that the sample with no Fe(III) added showed moderate oxygen and
chlorophyll yield, the second sample with .5-ppm Fe(III) added showed the highest chlorophyll and oxygen yield, and the third
sample with excess Fe(III) showed minimal yield.
It was observed that the difference in chlorophyll content between the samples was much greater than the respective
differences in oxygen. This is explained by the fact that the sample with moderate Fe added, consumed more of the oxygen
produced in its photosynthesis dark reaction than did the sample with no Fe added. This result further supports our hypothesis
because it suggests an increase in the Calvin cycle of the algae with added Fe - the increase in the Calvin cycle may directly
be
linked to an increase in Photosynthetic Rate. Also, there was a significant decrease in both oxygen and chlorophyll measurement
s
for the sample of algae with excess Fe. It was thus concluded from these two results that moderate addition of Iron (III) to al
gae
cultures in conducive to greater yield, and that excess concentration of Fe (III) is fatal to algal survival.