Project designs an electrode array to manufacture calcium carbonate structures in an oceanic environment,
and tests various electric currents for their effectiveness in manufacturing.
The purpose of this experiment was to test the effectiveness of various amounts of electric current (changed through
the use of resistors) on promoting calcium carbonate build-up in an ocean environment.
20 anode-cathode apparatus# were created, in 4 sets of 5. Each set contained 5 buckets connected to a
resistor value of 220-Ohms, 100-Ohms, 150-Ohms, or 56-Ohms. Each apparatus was built out of a square of galvanized
hardware cloth (cathode) and a 7.5 cm long anode made from stainless steel. Each anode was the same distance from the cathode
and each apparatus was connected to the resistor (to change the current) and in parallel to a 12-volt power supply. The
apparatus# were placed in an artificial ocean environment to accumulate calcium carbonate. Levels of accumulation were
determined by the weight of each assembly.
The apparatus# connected to the 150-Ohm and 220-Ohm resistors promoted the most calcium carbonate build-up by
weight, followed by the apparatus# connected to the 56-Ohm and 100-Ohm resistors.
Calcium carbonate structures are used to reinforce piers, create artificial breakwaters and reefs, and could be used to
create artificial #floating# islands in the ocean. In previous experiments, cathode shapes and materials were adjusted, as were
anodes and environments. These experiments showed that build-up occurred in both the artificial ocean environment and a real
ocean environment. They also showed that the galvanized hardware cloth accumulated more build-up, and did not decompose,
whereas aluminum screening decomposed after a week in the water. Results indicated a correlation between the reduction
potentials of the materials used for the anode and the levels of accumulation (materials with higher reduction potentials yield
greater accumulation). The data suggests that for the most accumulation the current flowing through the apparatus should be a
small one. This data could be used to enhance our knowledge of the creation of artificial reefs.