My objective was to learn how a magnet’s size effects magnetic repulsion, and if temperature alters the force.
To do my experiment I found 6 magnets, each with a different mass. I measured the repulsion
force between each magnet and my control magnet by sliding them both down a wooden dowel, like sides together (e.g. north to
north). With Charles Coulomb’s formula, [the mass of magnet 1, times the mass of magnet 2, divided by the distance squared
between them]I found the exact amount of repelling force.
I tested my experiment 3 times in each of the following temperatures: 5 degrees C (walk-in-refrigerator), 20 degrees C (ro
om
temperature), and 43 degrees C (underneath a heat lamp). I hypothesized that my smallest magnet(35.2g) would have the greatest
amount of repulsion between it and my control magnet(35.2g). I thought that temperature would not effect repulsion.
It turned out that my largest magnet(111.5g) consistently had the greatest amount of repulsion between it and my
control magnet. The smallest magnet had the least amount. Temperature also had an effect on the force. Inside the 5 degree C
atmosphere there was, consistently, a greater amount of repulsion in each test. In the 20 degree C atmosphere the amount of
repulsion was the lowest. The measurement of repulsion in the 42 degree C temperature was in-between the other two atmospheres
.
My results were the opposite to what I hypothesized. The largest magnet had the greatest amount
of force, and temperature did effect my results. My results taught me that temperature effects repulsion because the force was
greater in the cold atmosphere. In my mind, this explains why so many magnetization and mineral mines are in the freezing Nort
h,
and why levitating trains are in only the cold regions of Japan. I also learned that size effects force. The larger the magne
t, the
greater the force. This is probably why large magnets are used for things like MRI screenings and in televisions. The researc
h and
results of my experiment expanded the knowledge of magnetic repulsion and the things that effect it.