This project had two objectives. First, to determine the effect of steriochemistry on the reactivity of phosphines with
singlet oxygen; and second, to determine the mechanism by which phosphine oxidation proceeds.
This project utilized an excited form of dioxygen, singlet oxygen, to measure the reactivity rate of
sterically hindered tris(ortho-methoxyphenyl)phosphine and non-sterically hindered tris(para-methoxyphenyl)phosphine, two
isomers identical except for the placement of the methoxy group. Rate constants were measured in solvents of varying polaritie
s to
provide clues as to the polarity of the intermediate involved in phosphine oxidation. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance provided the
integration data used to calculate the reactivity rate of the phosphines. The molecule triphenylphosphine was also studied.
The reactivity rate decreased by nine times from the para- to the ortho-isomer #- demonstrating that steric hindrance plays
a large role in phosphine oxidation. Experiments conducted in various solvents show that non-polar solvents yielded higher
reactivity rates than polar solvents. In addition, at low phosphine concentrations, the experiment yielded oxidized insertion
products (insertion of an oxygen atom between a phosphorus and carbon atom) as opposed to the typical phosphine oxide. The
insertion product was more readily formed in non-polar solvents than in polar solvents following oxidation, demonstrating that
the
formation of the insertion product also proceeds via the non-polar, phosphadioxirane intermediate. The higher rate constant of
the
para-isomer compared to triphenylphosphine demonstrates that increased electron density about the phosphorus atom increases its
reactivity with singlet oxygen.
The steric factor and the electron density about the phosphorus atom play a major role in regulating the rate constant
at which phosphines react with singlet oxygen. The mechanism involved in phosphine oxidation was shown to be the non-polar
phosphadioxirane, as opposed to the polar zwitterion. By varying the solvent used and the concentration of the phosphine prese
nt
prior to oxidation, the yield of the insertion product and the standard phosphine oxide can be controlled.