The objective was to determine if a quantitative relationship exists between a sunscreen’s absorptivity of uv light and its
SPF value. Another objective was to determine which functional group of the molecules that are the active ingredients in the
sunscreens are responsible for the strong absorption of uv light.
Spectra from 225 nm to 400 nm were taken of solutions of sunscreens with SPF values of 4, 8, 15, 30,
and 45 to determine absorptivity maxima in this region. Absorptivity maxima of sunscreens were plotted versus the SPF values an
d
log of the SPF values. To determine whether a quantitative relationship exists, a statistical analysis by linear regression was
carried
out. Spectra were also taken of the active ingredients in sunscreens as well as model molecules with individual functional grou
ps
identical to the functional groups in the active ingredient molecules. Spectra intensities were compared to determine which
functional group is responsible of the strong uv absorption.
The linear fit of the plot of absorptivity maxima versus SPF yielded a slope of 0.202 g-cm/L with a standard deviation of
0.073 g-cm/L (36%), and R squared of 0.72, which isn’t very close to the desired value of one. The linear fit of the plot of
absorptivity maxima versus the log (SPF) yielded a slope of 9.16 g-cm/L, with a standard deviation of 1.50 g-cm/L (16%, much
closer to the desirable 0%), and an R squared value of 0.93 much closer to one. None of the model molecules (toluene, acetone,
propanol) absorbed enough uv light to be the functional group causing absorption. A spectrum of para aminobenzoic acid (PABA),
which combines several functional groups was also taken and showed a strong absorption similar to the active ingredients.
First, because the linear regression of absorptivity maxima vs. the log of SPF shows a low standard deviation of the
slope and an R squared really close to 1, a quantitative relationship between the two quantities is demonstrated to exist. As a
result
expensive human testing of SPF values could be replaced by spectrometry. Second, PABA proved that the right combination of
functional groups (benzene ring, carbonyl, and hydroxyl groups) causes strong absorption of uv light similar to that observed i
n
sunscreens.